Good morning, Dr. Seaffrey. It's a It's
a true pleasure to have you on the
podcast today. Uh, obviously we'll be
discussing all things cancer in short
order, but before we get into it, would
you mind introducing yourself to the
audience for those who aren't familiar
with you and your body of work?
>> Yeah. Well, well, thank you, Rob. It's
nice to be here. Um, I'm a a professor
of biology at Boston College. I have
been here for well since 1985, 40 years
now. And before that, I was at Yale
University in New Haven, Connecticut. Um
I here at Boston College I I I've taught
a a broad range of of classes over the
years. Neurobiology, neurochemistry,
neurogenetics.
Uh now I teach general biology to the
non- majors as well as as an advanced um
class in cancer metabolism. Cancer is a
metabolic disease. So our our our
background biochemical for biochemistry
was lipid bio lipid biochemistry. I did
a lot of work on lipid biochemistry. And
as far as diseases are concerned, lipid
storage diseases as as well as um uh
genetic diseases uh epilepsy in
particular. And now our our main focus
over the last uh uh quarter of a century
has been predominantly cancer but we are
moving into uh also other chronic
diseases as well. So so we I have a kind
of a broadbased experience. I have a
degree in in genetics and biochemistry,
a master's degree in genetics. Uh so uh
those are those are the background um uh
the background educational experience
that I've had.
>> That's incredible. Born and a resume may
I could I could I suppose I could only
dream of. Um I I think one of the the
big issues in the health podcast space
is is creating content that is sort of
based on actual science and to have
someone with your background and
credibility. I feel just well it will at
least hopefully sort of highlight that
we're not here just to obviously discuss
pseudocience today that this is all sort
of based in in yeah in empirical data.
Um Dr. Seaf Freed. Uh, and I know we're
here to really talk about uh, the
metabolic theory of cancer, but I think
it would be prudent to maybe start off
with, uh, having a quick conversation
about what cancer actually is. And I
know it's likely a dull question, but I
do feel it's uh, that very few people
actually know what the disease is. Uh,
it's just something that they aim to
just not get. Uh, I've got a few
questions there, but yeah, maybe we
could just start off with with that. a
cancer biology 101 as it would as it
were if you would just yeah mind running
through what cancer is.
>> Well, it's a it's it's actually a ve
it's a complicated problem but it's a
very
um simple
definition of what cancer is. It's cell
division out of control. Um disregulated
cell growth. So people say, "Well,
what's cancer?" It's just a bunch of
cells that are no longer regulated in
their growth. Um, of course, the origin
of that phenomenon is broad. Uh but what
h what is it that makes a population of
cells in a particular organ of someone's
body to start growing in a in a
disregulated way as opposed to normal
cell division
uh which is regulated. Um you know in
parts of our body there's wear and tear.
cells naturally die and are replaced.
But the replacement of dead cells is a
very organized process. They they grow
uh they they they divide and they
however many divisions is necessary to
replace those that are missing is a
well- reggulated process. And we'll we
know now that's all controlled by the
mitochondrian. But an example of of cell
division under control
that one of the is in the gut you have
the crypt cells that seem to always
replace other cells in a very regulated
way way and in the liver you have um
liver regeneration. Liver is an
interesting organ because if you remove
a lobe of the liver, uh the liver will
regenerate the missing part of the lobe
and and and the the speed of of liver
regenerating cells is just as fast as
that of the fastest cancer. The di the
only difference is is that the liver uh
replacement liver regeneration is
regulated growth whereas a hepatoma of
the liver which is liver cancer is
disregulated growth and the biochemistry
of those two populations is strikingly
different. So when you ask what is
cancer it's disregulated growth in a
population of cells in someone's organ
which differs from regulated growth uh
of cells in that organ. So sort of out
of control mitosis, you might say in a
nutshell.
>> Yeah. And and the and the question that
has perplexed the field for decades is
uh what regulates what is responsible
for regulated growth in the first place.
You know why would one cell know when to
stop growing and another cell not know
when to stop growing? And that all comes
back to the role of the mitochondrian in
the cytoplasm. The mitochondrian
controls calcium signaling within the
cell. Uh
Nobel prizes have been awarded awarded
for people to learn the cell the
cyclones and uh going through the cell
cycle. Uh and that cell cycle is all
controlled by calcium signaling from the
mitochondria.
So, so when mitochondria of the cell
become uh dysfunctional in the sense of
producing energy and that calcium
gradients
um they fall back on a fermentation
metabolism uh which is an ancient form
of energy without oxygen and and the
mitochondrian loses control of the
differentiated state
>> that being anorobic respiration.
>> Yeah. anorobic. You can you can you can
grow cancer cells in the absence of
oxygen or in the presence of cyanide and
they they they survive. So so um which
would normally kill normal cells. Uh and
that's because their energy metabolism
is of an ancient type. It's the type of
energy that uh existed on the planet
before oxygen came into the atmosphere
two and a half billion years ago. It was
a fermentation metabolism generating
energy without without uh oxygen. And
the the default state of cells is
proliferation.
Um the default energy state of cells is
fermentation.
So when what cancer cells are doing is
they're simply falling back on their
default proliferative state and their
default energy state behaving behaving
much as they were of all cells that
existed before oxygen which was
unbridled proliferation. uh and they
would die as soon as the fuels that
drove the proliferation
metabolism would dissipate in the micro
environment and the cells would die. So
it was purely an energydriven process
without regulation. Uh during the origin
of life on the planet, archaobacteria
fused with other other cells to to to
develop the mitochondrian. And it was
the mitochondrian that allowed the
division of energetic labor in the cells
allowing metazzoans to form and the most
complex multisellular organisms that we
have today. All all due to the energy
capacity of the mitochondria and the the
nucleus which everybody seems to have
focused on is because you could see it
sometimes even with the naked eye.
Whereas the mitochondria for for
centuries could not be seen clearly um
until you had the electron microscope
and and more sophisticated ways of
looking at this organel.
But but in a in a nutshell it's the
mitochondrian that controls the
regulation of genes in the nucleus. So
um all this epigenetic stuff you hear
about is mostly mitochondrial controlled
mitochondria controlled. So the nucleus
is kind of a an obedient
uh slave of whatever the mitochondria
does because if that organel becomes
corrupted the cell falls back as a
in one of these disregulated growths.
So, so everything comes back to the
origin of cancer as a corruption of
mitochondrial function only in cells
that can switch to the ancient
fermentation pathways which can explain
why certain cells in our body never
become tumor. Red blood cells can't
become a tumor because they have no
mitochondria or nucleus in the first
place. Neurons of our brain cannot
sustain fermentation. So you rarely if
ever get cancers from neurons they get
it from the cells.
>> What about cardiac tissue? Uh
>> cardiac tissue rarely if ever gets
cancer because they cannot replace
oxidative phosphorilation with substrate
level phosphorilation. So you rarely if
ever get cancer of muscle
striate or cardiac tissue because they
die and you can't get a cancer cell from
a dead cell. So we're able to go through
the body and look at the kinds of
tissues that form cancer uh uh because
they have the the they have the capacity
to transition from oxidative
phosphorilation to substrate level
phosphorilation which is a protracted
event. It doesn't happen overnight. You
really have to abuse the hell out of
your mitochondria in a chronic way to
get cancer. Cancer is very hard to get.
Um it's I know it's exploding as an
epidemic, but but we abuse the crap out
of our bodies and that's why we're
getting so much cancer. Uh but it's
really hard uh to get cancer. So when
you say, well, how come so many people
because they they because their bodies
have been chronically abused by a
variety of insults uh many of which
they're not even aware of. Um but that's
that's how you get cancer. it it's a
chronic uh disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation coupled to a
compensatory
substrate level phosphorilation and
Warberg knew this a long time ago from
the 1920s.
uh but he only knew that it was a
glucose-driven transition from uh but we
now discovered um and have I had the
concept but not the evidence but now we
published a big paper recently that the
cancer cell can ferment an amino acid
called glutamine. So you get sugar and
amino acid fermentation are driving the
disregulated growth of the tumor cell.
And the field all thought it was
glutamine respiration oxidative but it's
not. It's glutamine fermentation within
the mitochondria itself. So the very
organel that's supposed to get energy
through oxidative phosphorilation is
also producing energy through substrate
level phosphorilation which is a
fermentation mechanism. This is what's
blowing the doors off the field. you
know they they never realized that the
very organel could also ferment
and that goes back to its organ its
origin as a as a bacteria itself. So uh
you know once yeah once you understand
evolutionary biology all the pieces of
cancer fall into place quite quite
reasonably.
>> No it really does and I just love the
fact you you brought up the mitochondria
as being more than just this sort of
this energy factory of the body. that's
just involved in so many epigenetic
processes beyond just helping to create
ATP. Um, and yeah, thanks for that. It
really does sort of provide some context
to what is going for the rest of the
conversation. Uh I reckon the natural
followup there and again this is quite a
loose question I suppose is um I suppose
and you've already answered this to to
to an degree but and sort of and beyond
the sort of the the metabolic side of it
I'd love to sort of get your your
thoughts on the different theories that
are sort of driving cancer. Obviously,
it's it's it's a complex there's complex
ideology there and it's it would be and
it shouldn't be viewed from this sort of
reductionist viewpoint that there is
just one mechanism that causes cancer.
Um I know in my brief experience in
academia that people studying these
conditions can often get wrapped up in
their own mechanisms and occasionally be
blinded by research. Obviously you have
a fairly well-rounded view. So would you
mind talking us through the various sort
of um and I hope uh I sort of phrase
this correctly proposed triggers maybe
or underlying mechanisms that uh sort of
lead to the development of this uh
condition sort of the genetic causes the
environmental risk factors the
immunological uh side of things. Um I
don't know if I phrased that correctly
um or if that makes sense.
>> Yeah. Well it does. I mean when you look
at the history of of the disorder that
has intrigued scientists you know for
centuries um you know we knew about
cancer long time ago Vercow in the 1800s
people were studying these things um
you know and and how does it start you
know you have the emergence of of
different ideas concepts of of what
cancer what what cancer is the current
view taken by all major
research Arch centers and academic
centers is that it's a genetic disease.
Um I know the UK thinks that uh the
United States government national cancer
institute believe that. I think most of
the cancer institutes around the world
the French the Germans the English all
western major and even in China and
Japan and Korea um you know South
America they're they're all of the view
that cancer is a gen. seems to be some
sort of a a par paralytic mindset
throughout the world. It's an
indoctrination, a brainwashing if you
will,
>> um of of what this disease is supposed
to be. But it wasn't always that way. Um
you know, uh there was the viral cancer
was a was um a virus caused by viruses.
Uh and cancer was a metabolic disease.
You know, cancer is a genetic disease.
So, so you have to you have to put all
the views over time into into what what
it is. And uh you know, Warberg started
the idea that it was a mitochondrial
metabolic disease. Um but he he couldn't
explain certain things which we we now
can explain. He didn't know about the
glutamine issue. Nor did he realize that
a lot of the oxygen that cancer cells
consume is not used uh for ATP but
produces reactive oxygen species R O.
>> Yeah.
>> Which are radicals and they cause many
uh in large part the mutations in the
nucleus. Um so uh you know v c certain
viruses. Okay. Well we knew v c certain
like like papilloma viruses and
hepatitis viruses and and the rouse
saroma virus. Payton Rouse uh was a
Nobel Prize receiver for his virus
particle. Uh we now put all that
together. We know all these viruses
damage oxidative phosphorilation
chronically causing this transition to
substrate level phosphorilation.
But it was the Watson and Crick uh DNA
structural analysis that kind of sent
the whole field off into the into the
abyss uh chasing stuff uh that we are
still chasing because it became exciting
to bring a very complicated mishy marshy
disease back into a molecular
uh configuration. And I and I think that
was um I call it physics envy.
uh biology had always been a a poor
stepchild to the pure rational thought
of the human mind which was physics. Um
and uh when when d when the DNA
structure was defined and you could
explain the or the um arrangement of
amino acids and um RNAs all linked back
to the structure of the DNA. biology was
brought from a observational uh kind of
a disorder or a field into a more
quantitative way. And then of course as
soon as you started looking at cancer
cells, you start to see chromosomal
abnormalities. Uh that goes back to
Theodore Bouver who knew nothing about
cancer and he said I think cancer might
be something to do with chromosomes. Um
purely speculative. He was he even said
I'm probably wrong about everything. and
he was um but the field grabbed a hold
of him as the father of the genetic
theory of cancer and then of course you
started to see gene mutations associated
with certain cancers. Uh and then and
then with deeper and then we spent
billions of dollars on the cancer genome
projects looking at every kind of a
mutation
and and then and then therapies
precision and medicine and all this
developed around the genomic view of
cancer where we're going to have
precision medicines um targeted
therapies and all this kind of stuff. um
which is where we are today. And uh and
and and and
all the governments and and academic
institutions are giving away millions of
dollars in grant report grants to people
trying to hunt down genes that could be
responsible for the disregulated cell
growth. So it it comes back what we know
cancer is a disregulated cell growth.
What's causing that?
>> Yeah. Well, the the according to the
sematic mutation theory, which is the
dominant theory today,
>> it's mutations that are causing that.
>> But I've clearly shown that those
mutations are are largely irrelevant. Um
uh with our research that's that's a
heads they can't they can't they can't
attack it because it's it's it's too the
evidence is too strong. So when you have
evidence that's overwhelmingly strong
and it's not consistent with your
general theory, then you ignore it. but
you're only going to ignore it for so
long. So when you develop a theory,
uh theories are supported by a massive
amounts of of evidence. Uh the somatic
mutation theory was very very strong
because you found almost all cancers
with somatic mutations.
uh and these somatic mutations, some of
them were linked to the cell cycle,
which you could then link uh a mutation
in the genome to something that would
lead to dysregulation or dysfunction of
the cell cycle and that made a lot of
sense. Um so people grab grabbed onto
that and and because it was so molecular
and so quantitative and and um and uh
approachable by really sophisticated
technologies which have developed around
uh cancer like all these sequencing
unbelievable
AI now artificial intelligence helping
se analysis of of sequencing and all of
the different kinds and types of
mutations that were found in cancer
cells. I mean it was an explosion of
molecular biology associated with
cancer. Um so that was very attractive
uh to to a lot of people. Um but then
having done work in my lab and seeing
research that was far more consistent
with what Otto Warberg said than with
the uh somatic mutation theory. Uh I
began to look at this. But getting back
to theories, you know, I I like to
compare what we what's happening today
with the mitochondrial metabolic theory
replacing the somatic mutation theory
because it really takes a lot of
evidence to replace a theory.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh Einstein's theory of relativity could
still be replaced. Uh but it has not yet
been. And and and there are there are
physicists that are constantly trying to
show where Einstein was wrong. uh and
they believe they might but they
haven't. Uh Darwin's theory of evolution
has been challenged many times but it
has not been o overthrown uh because the
data that support it are stronger than
the data that don't support it. And then
you have the geocentric heliocentric
theory of the solar system where for
1800 years people thought that the earth
was the center of the solar system
>> and we developed equants deference and
and epicycles to try to predict the
positions of the planets and capernicus
just replaced the earth with the sun and
all of a sudden a lot of stuff was far
less complicated and more
understandable. So the um heliocentric
theory replaced the geocentric theory
opened up a a scientific revolution
during the middle ages um the
renaissance period. Um what we're having
today is that mitochondrial metabolic
theory is overturning the somatic
mutation theory and the consequences are
going to be every bit as phenomenal as
what happened uh during the capernician
revolution. Um so so we we look at we
look at evidence to support a theory. If
cancer is a somatic m a disease of
somatic mutations which is the current
dogma irrefutable truth the silent
assumption cancer is a genetic disease.
Well now with deep sequencing and deeper
analysis we find some cancer cells that
don't have any mutations yet they're out
of growing out of control. So when I
looked at those f there's not many
papers but there are some very clear
findings and then when I say what do the
investigators who believe that cancer is
a genetic disease say about cancer cells
that don't have mutations or they can't
find any mutations and they don't say
anything. So when I went back and looked
at their explan they didn't even they
ignored it. They didn't even talk about
the cancer cells that had no mutations.
They just seem to focus on all the
cancer cells that had mutations. And I
said, 'You got a glaring inconsistency
in your theory staring you in the face
and you did not address it. What the
hell's going on with that? Then of
course they realized that there's so
many hundreds of thousands of mutations
in some of these tumor cells, they all
can't be drivers of disregulated cell
growth. So then the field decided to cla
reclassify some of the mutations as
passenger genes and driver genes. So we
then moved into the driver gene
mentality which lasted several decades
uh where only some of these many
mutations are truly responsible for
disregulated cell growth and we redefine
them is called drivers.
>> Yeah.
>> And that got that uh generated a lot of
excitement since the 19 early 1980s I
guess middle 80s driver genes. Driver
gene. Oh the driver genes. So now with
deep sequencing and more sophisticated
technologies, we're finding all kinds of
mutations in driver genes in our normal
tissues uh like you and me. I mean we we
got all kinds of mutations in p-53 and
make and ras and all these kinds of
genes that are in our normal tissues and
they're not disregulated in growth. How
you explain that? That's inconsistent
with your sematic mutation theory.
>> Yeah. Are there any real sort of
polygenic risks maybe that sort of have
been identified um in respect to this?
>> Uh uh the nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments throw that's the the real
nail in the coffin for the whole thing.
Um because what was done on a variety of
different types of cancers is that the
nucleus of the tumor cell is now placed
in the cytoplasm of a non-neoplastic
cell. uh and invariably you get
regulated growth despite the continued
presence of whatever kind of genetic
abnormality might have been in that
nucleus whether it was polygenic whether
it was chromosomeal whether it was point
mutations uh frame shift mutation didn't
make any difference when that cancer
nucleus was placed into the cytoplasm of
a non-cancerous cell that that new cell
no longer had disregulated cell growth.
That's quite interesting. and and and
that's been done repeatedly and uh in
vivo and in vitro so in all kinds of
experimental systems uh um meaning that
normal cytoplasm suppresses neoplastic
growth. On the other hand, if the
nucleus of a normal cell is now placed
in the cytoplasm of a tumor cell, you
got disregulated growth um which is
completely the opposite of what you
would have expected on the semantic
mutation theory. So when you when you
have the opportunity to sit down and
carefully evaluate all of the evidence
from the nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments also if you have a raging
tumor cell uh and you replace the
mitochondria with normal mitochondria
just put normal mito you get complete
down reggulation of this disregulated
growth. You can convert you can convert
a raging uh tumor cell into an indolent
tumor cell by putting normal
mitochondria back in the cytoplasm.
Mitochondrial medicine type.
>> I just say I I'm getting ahead of my
curve. I'm going to shoot myself in the
foot by asking this question now. But
just with regards to that then is there
any uh thought to the idea that
mitochondrial transplants could be a a
potential therapy um in that regard?
>> Absolutely. But it but that's the
future. It's not here yet because we we
have to make sure that the mitochondria
that are transplanted are normal in
number, structure and function. And and
during the very process of manipulating
these mitochondria, you can also damage
them and and you have to know how to do
that. So uh mitochondrial medicine is
going to be the future. Uh but where the
technology to do that is is is not here
yet. So our our approach to managing
cancer is killing the tumor cells while
not harming the rest of the body and and
then uh allowing people to live far
longer with a higher quality of life
while mitochondrial medicine is under
development. That's the that's the
that's the uh uh the thing you know it's
very interesting because uh when you
have disregulated cell growth in cancer
they're fermenting like crazy and and
the ankco genes which which have
generated tremendous interest we have
shown and others uh hifan alpha mick and
these things uh they are there uh and
they are facilitators of opening the
floodgates for fermentation fuels to get
into the cell and when you put new
mitochondria into the into the cell the
ankco genes turn off. You don't need
them anymore. Why are you going to why
are you going to ferment when I can
respire? So the ankco genes are no
longer needed and they and normal
mitochondrial respiration turn off m
ankco gene express. So you shut down the
glycolysis and the glutaminolysis
pathways because you don't need glucose
and glutamine. You can respire.
Everything is per makes perfect sense
and the data show that. So where did all
the mutations come from? They came from
the the biology of inefficient oxidative
phosphorilation throwing out uh reactive
oxygen species which the super oxide uh
and the uh uh annion the O radical which
are carcinogenic and mutagenic and they
come out of the dysfunctional
mitochondria creating an escalating
situation of biological chaos. So what
we're seeing or what the field is mostly
focusing on is downstream epiphenomena
of the damage to mitochondria
uh and all the squali that follow uh
that you know it's really it's really
amazing to me I I just can't figure out
how the field doesn't understand this I
try to I don't know maybe I have to
write it in crayon maybe they
you know sometimes you just have to do
that you have to take the back of a neck
and smash the guy's face into the
evidence to let him see it but but you
know you So the interesting thing is is
that you see you you see all these all
these clear uh uh uh evidence that you
can manage this this disease quite
effectively by just um depriving the
cell of the two fermentable fuels uh
that it needs and then transitioning the
whole body over to fuels that the tumor
cells can't use. So, so um you know,
intrinsically intrinsically people
people people say, "Oh, cancer cells are
so tough and and hardy and they're so
versatile." That's total crap. How do
you explain a cell with a nucleus blown
to hell with all these mutations and
you're going to have that cell behave
more
uh uh transitional and more flexible
than a than the cells in our body that
evolved over millions of years to adjust
their metabolism to the situation. And
the cancer cell can do this with a a
nucleus that's blown to hell makes no
sense in evolutionary biology. People
don't understand evolutionary biology.
The only the way you understand cancer
and many other diseases, you must
understand evolutionary biology. And if
you don't do that, you're going to be in
the dark. You're going to be in the
dark. And that's what explains a lot of
the stuff that we have in medicine
today. Because if people don't
understand evolutionary biology, they
remain in the dark. And as long as you
remain in the dark, you ain't moving
forward. So, you know, here's what they
say. Oh, cancer cells are tough to kill
because we're throwing everything at
radiation and chemo and imunotherapies
and those damn cancer cells can survive
all they're protecting themselves with
the waste products of fermentation
metabolism. They say everybody knows
they say oh the cancer environment is so
acidified it it protects them from the
therapies that we have. Where does the
acidification come from? The waste
products of glucose and glutamine
fermentation. If you take away glucose
and glutamine, you remove the
acidification of the micro environment,
making the tumor cells extremely
vulnerable to small doses of radiation,
chemo, and these other procedures. You
know, how is that not understood by guys
that are supposed to be smart? Don't you
understand why the damn tumor cells are
not dying from what you're throwing at
them? Because they're fermenting. If
they ferment, you take away the
fermentable fuels. Oh, that can't be
right. It's too simple. Yeah. And it
works. And it is right. Get over it. You
want to You want to live longer, you
take away the fermentable fuels and then
you give them fatty acids and ketones
and you say and the cancer cell can't
because you need a good mitochondria.
You need fatty acids and ketone bodies
cannot be used as a fuel by cancer cells
because the mitochondria are
inefficient. C fatty acids and ketone
bodies can be used by most of our normal
cells because we have good mitochondria,
healthy mitochondria. So we lower the
blood sugar, elevate the ketones and
then come in and target the glutamine
pathways uh strategically in a in a in a
an approach that we developed the press
pulse therapeutic strategy. You can
glucose is a non-essential metabolite.
Glucose is a non-essential metabolite.
We can live with very very minimal
levels of glucose just to keep our
ariththraittes moving moving oxygen and
CO2 through the body. Takes tiny amounts
of of glucose. But the majority of
muscles and brain can all transition
over to ketone bodies. Tumor cells
cannot. We tested them. We interrogated
these cells. They and tumor cells
collect huge droplets of fatty acids in
the cytoplasm because they cannot use
the fatty acids. If you force the tumor
cell to use the fatty acids, it develops
reactive oxygen species and explodes and
dies. So that's why they store the fatty
acids in the cytoplasm because if they
try to use them, they're going to kill
them. So this is simply a protective
mechanism. I can't tell you how many
people are writing papers saying tumor
cells love fatty acids because they
store them in the cytoplasm because they
need them for fuel. Yeah, we'll try to
goose the cell to use the fatty acids
and all of a sudden the cell dies. try
to grow your cells, your cancer cells in
the absence of glucose and glutamine, in
the presence of fatty acids and ketone
bodies with no glucose, no fermentable
fuels, they die. So, it becomes very
clear how to manage cancer. So, um we're
aware of this. Unfortunately, the field
still has to come to grips with this and
and I think they slowly are uh but it it
takes time unfortunately.
>> Yeah, I know. I think we could probably
pause stop the podcast there. That was
incredible. Thank you. I'm definitely
going to have to relisten to to a bunch
of that.
>> Well, not only listen not only relisten
to it, read the damn papers that we
published. Uh we I go into great
biochemical details. I have the the
evidence uh uh put out in those papers
that we published. And they're open
access so everybody can read them.
Anybody with a few functional brain
cells can sit down and read these papers
and make their own decision as to what
they think in light of the I do a
compare and contrast the theories. I do
the evidence supporting uh uh the
different theories and you tell me what
you think is happening. Um and you know
I learned it's there's very few people
that actually understand or not
understand who read actually read the
literature. They all wait and what they
they only do what other people are doing
and they ask other people what they
think and if the person says oh no it
can't be okay then I believe it can't be
why don't you use your own brain cells
and an analyze the data for yourself you
got you you know that's one of the great
things about humans is we have a
rational mind uh that's what we were
gifted with but I'll tell you dogmatic
views political religion all that takes
away from rational thinking And when you
lose your r ability to to sit and
rationalize then then you lose a part of
your humanity. And and and and what
we're seeing here the reason why there's
a delay in the movement from the sematic
mutation theory to the mitochondrial
metabolic theory which will prevent and
manage diseases dramatically. We're
going to drop cancer death rates like
there's no tomorrow. We're going to keep
people alive because we understand the
science supporting what we're saying.
And then once people start looking at it
and seeing that we are essentially
correct, not on all the minutia, we can
always work out minutia later on. But
the bottom line is how long can I keep
somebody with a stage four tumor alive?
Oh, he's got three months to live. Are
you kidding me? We've got people that
were given those diet, they're still
alive five and six years later because
they've transitioned their body over to
nutritional ketosis and came in with
certain lowd dose medications to kill
off the tumor cells. So, I know it's
going to work because I've seen enough
pre-clinical studies and human studies,
small trials to know this will work and
keeps people alive. Unfortunately, you
go to your top hospitals and they tell
you, "Oh, no, you got to have this." And
did you ever hear that cancer is a
metabolic? No, I never heard of it. Take
eat sugar. Eat eat all the high high
carbohydrate diets. Uh why? Oh, because
you're losing weight. Why am I losing
weight? Well, you have cancer and we
just try to poison you. Anybody who's
poisoned loses weight. So So you you get
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue. Why
are you doing that? Well, we used the
toxic poison on you. Why are you doing
that? Well, we're trying to kill your
tumor cells. I went bald. Why? Why you
go bald? I I lost all my hair. Did Oh,
did you have tum tumor cells growing in
your hair follicles? No, they just
happened to die. Why are you trying to
kill tumor cells, not kill your hair or
or blow out your gut? That tells you
that's the those are the act th those
are the procedures of people who lack
knowledge. What we're what we're seeing
is a is a is the result of massive lack
of knowledge on the biochemistry and
biology of the very disease that people
are working with and we're using
medieval medieval therapies that are
torturing people. I think people of the
during the Spanish Inquisition would be
very impressed with with how we're
torturing cancer patients in these
hospitals. They they could say, "Well,
we could learn something from you guys.
You know, where do I get red red devil
doc rubes? We could give that to to a
heretic." You you know, uh it's terrible
for me to say stuff like this. But, you
know, when you see when you see 1,700
people a day in the United States dying
from cancer at 70 people an hour and you
see cancer getting worse and worse
around the world, I mean, grab somebody
by the throat and say, "What the hell
are we doing? Why are we allowing this
to happen?" Because of a failed theory.
That's what it is. a theory that's no
longer supported by the evidence and you
guys keep treating people based on an
incorrect theory and the outcome is
abysmal.
>> Yeah. What did Einstein say? Insanity is
doing the same thing over and over and
again and expecting a different result.
Something to that extent.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, why why are they doing don't they
know what Einstein said? Did they not
hear what Einstein said?
>> Yeah.
>> And and there's another issue of
morality
>> which is even a worse issue. And you
don't like to be referred to as an
immoral person, but when you're taking
pe uh uh drugs that are not based on the
correct theory and treating people with
them uh and and knowing that they won't
work uh and and this is that's immoral
and and and the other part of this is
that many of those drugs are very very
expensive.
>> Yeah.
>> And and and what happens they they not
only call cause physical toxicity, they
cause financial toxicity. many people
their marriages dissolve, they commit
suicide, the the the cost is passed on
to the surviving relatives uh uh in and
for folks that are are not well off. Uh
you know, a $20,000 bill, even though
they covered 80% of the 100,000, 20,000
can a family uh with limited
means. This is immoral. The whole cancer
industry is an immoral industry. uh
they're they're allowing people to
suffer and die based on an incorrect
theory and they're allowing physical and
and financial toxicity. Th this these
are immoral acts acts and and and and we
have the the a strategy that can
absolutely reduce the deaths of cancer,
keep people alive with a higher quality
of life and it's not being done anywhere
on the planet. Now you tell me what's
wrong with that. Uh yeah, I'm I'm even
going to try and sort of answer that
question just at this point Dr. Seaffrey
again that that was an amazing answer.
Thank you. Um I'd just like to take a
step back quickly and discuss uh have a
quick discussion about um your your
thoughts on testing. Now um the way I
see testing testing is it's it's
generally done quite acutely when
somebody presents with a disease. In
this case, um you you you'll obviously
get a physical exam done, some sort of
imaging, probably some sort of biopsy as
well, uh some blood test looking at
various biomarkers, etc. But in no way
is this sort of testing preventative. Um
it generally is only um yeah
treated and dealt with when the issues
arise. Now obviously there are various
technologies that are starting to sort
of come up things like liquid biopsies.
Maybe you can elucidate on that
slightly. these full body MRIs uh which
are obviously somewhat controversial in
the sense that they may or may not pick
up incidental uh the idea of uh uh
finding an issue that may not be an
issue that then requires further
investigation that then may or may not
actually turn into an issue. Um what's
your stance on early detection um as a
whole? Uh do you think it's something we
should be exploring more beyond just the
basic get your colonoscopy done when you
hit 40 plus or does the whole thing
again about incidental NAS and treating
cancer from that perspective
excuse me not treating and scanning from
for cancer from that perspective
generally make it a bit of a mute point.
>> Yeah. Well you you have a couple of
things here to break down. Um the
diagnostics uh I I'm in favor of
non-invasive diagnostic uh approaches.
Um you know, if we have if we have a
liquid biopsy that's 95% accurate in
determining whether or not you have a a
neoplastic growth somewhere in your
body, I'm all for that. Um and then, you
know, uh non-invasive imaging, whether
it's a PET scan, MRI, CAT scan, or one
of these kinds of things. I'm not in
favor of biopsy because I have seen so
many papers published in the scientific
literature showing that when you stab uh
a cancer you you run the risk of causing
metastasis
uh met metastasis where the spread of
the tumor um the cells can spread around
your body making what was formerly a
localized problem a a systemic problem.
So, um, so I'm in favor of of for
diagnostics,
um, you know, uh, colonoscopies and and
breast things and stuff like this, those
are, um, you know, I I don't know what
to say h about that. I know there's a
lot of controversy about that. You know,
most people who develop cancer have
certain physical signs that in their
body that something is wrong. like you
said, a lump uh a a wound uh uh that
doesn't heal uh blood that continues to
come from some location. Um uh you know,
those those can be then liquid biop
biopsy to see if there's a real linkage
to some neoplasia
scanning of the body or something along
these lines. And then once you would
make a diagnosis without without a
biopsy, you see a lump. Okay, let's
let's launch into metabolic therapy and
see if we can shrink the lump naturally
uh with diet drug combinations uh non
non-toxic drugs and diets that we've
developed here at BC. Um and if you
shrink the lump and it goes away, well
then and the imaging analysis and the
liquid biopsy data, what what happened?
Where did it go? I don't see any of the
the markers that were there previously.
That's great. And if it doesn't go away
completely, you might have shrunken it
down. uh and make it much smaller, in
which case a surgical procedure uh or a
a dose of radiation at a very defined
spot could be potentially curative. Um
so there's a lot of ways to diagnose and
treat cancer in early stages uh
different than what we're doing uh
today. You know, we're doing too rad
we're too radical on this whole thing.
You know, you see a lump in the rip the
person's breasts off or something like
this. You know, I don't know what to say
about colonoscopies or breast exam
exams. Breast cancer rises every year in
females in this country. Colorectal
cancer is on the rise. So, I don't know
what's going on. All the major cancers
seem to be many many of the major
cancers seem to be on the rise and
happening in younger and younger people.
>> Yeah. If you're to speculate, do you
think that is an environmentalist issue
just sort of maybe excess sort of uh uh
xenoestrogens in the in the environment
that are particularly may just from a
breast cancer perspective maybe
triggering these issues or is that a bit
reductionist? Again,
>> I think most of it is environmental. Uh
I mean there there are some people who
have genetic predispositions
u to insults from the environment. You
you have to realize that cancer is a
disease. In fact, not only cancer, most
of the chronic diseases that we are
dealing with, which is dementia, type
two diabetes, obesity, hypertension,
high blood pressure, a lot of
neuroscychiatric problems are all all
the result of mitochondrial dysfunction
in one way or another caused caused by
the diet lifestyle that we're that we're
all under. Um and you know uh and we
know and we know this pretty much
because Paleolithic men would not have
had any of these kinds of conditions. Um
they died predominantly from infections
and injuries. Uh uh they did not have
orthopedic surgeons to repair a broken
knee from some guy you know gored by a
buffalo. Um so so uh and how do we know
that? Because people say, "Well, you
have you weren't there during
Paleolithic period 500,000 years ago."
But we have people on the planet who
still live according through traditional
ways. And these folks also didn't have
cancer or a lot of the chronic diseases
that we that we have today. How do we
know that? Because Albert Schweitzer and
a number of other physicians and
humanitarians were investigating these
primitive tribes and they didn't they
said, "Wow, they're remarkably different
from those that live in the United
States and England."
So they were not obese. Uh they didn't
have any chronic diseases. They had
infect they had bacterial infections,
parasites and and things like this. So
what's the difference between the the
western diet and lifestyle and the
paleolithic diet and lifestyle? And
predominantly it's the availability of
of highly processed carbohydrates
in in in our in our diets. A paleolithic
man does not did never had highly
processed carbohydrates in his diet. We
did not evolve as a as to to evolve in a
in an environment with highly processed
carbs.
>> By highly processed carbohydrates, are
you talking obviously
and my evolution biology is definitely
not my strong point. But I assume you
mean sort of very high GI carbohydrates,
things your processed sugars, honeys,
etc. opposed to things like root
vegetables, things that are potentially
lower on the glycemic scale that maybe
wouldn't. Yeah.
>> Yes. Yes. Predominantly things that can
live in a p remain edible in a package.
Like I have a I have a Twinkie here. Um,
this twi this Twinkie is 10 years old
and um it looks edible and a mouse a m
it's 10 years old and and a mouse ate it
broke in and ate one of these uh two
years ago and he didn't complain and and
there are people that are hungry that
would eat one 10-year-old twin. This is
a synthetic thing uh made from all
chemicals and sugars. Th this kind of
stuff will kill you. Uh yet we eat large
amounts of it. Not only that, we deep
fry it and put powdered sugar and
chocolate syrup on the damn thing.
>> You should go to Scotland. That that
sounds like breakfast.
>> Yeah. Right. So, so then we wonder why
we got cancer and high high blood
pressure and hypertension,
neuroscsychiatric problems. Um so, and
the lack of exercise is unbelievable.
>> Uh paleo, you know how hard it is to
track down and kill a big animal.
>> Uh it's not easy. You have to have well
runners. You have to have strong guys to
to track down and kill these buffalo.
And you have to kill kill the a mammoth,
a woolly mammoth and and these kinds of
big animals that lived in Paleolithic
times. And that was a lot of energy uh
to kill not only to kill the the big
thing, but to chop it up and eat it. You
know, they'd go for the bone marrow uh
as a as a f a fuel source that was very
rich in nutrients. Um we're sitting in
traffic today. Uh we're sitting in front
of computers. Uh we're not we don't
nearly have the amount of energy that
was expended during pale paleolithic
times. Uh we're eating highly processed
carbs, bad food, we have bad sleep. Uh
uh we have emotional stress. We have all
of these things that impact negatively
uh the number structure and function of
mitochondria in our cells. It is not
surprising that we have all of the
chronic diseases and cancer that we are
currently suffering with in in modern
western societies. It's absolutely
understandable in terms of our
evolutionary biology.
We are still paleolithic man
biologically but living in a modern
industrialized society where all of the
desires that we would have had in
paleolithic time are now at our
fingertips in any supermarket. We don't
have to go out and hunt down animals. Uh
everything is prepared, packaged, and
ready for us to eat uh right away. We
don't have to expend a lot of energy to
cook it up, kill it, and cook it every
night. Uh it's preserved, well
preserved. So we don't we can we can uh
store it for a long period of time and
eat it and eventually it beats the hell
out of your mitochondria in your body.
And some people you get more you get
obesity, type two diabetes,
hypertension, high blood pressure,
macular degeneration, dementia, cancer.
every every one of those diseases
uh disorders is the result of
mitochondrial dysfunction uh in way in
one way or another. Some some cells up
and die become dis dysfunctional not
becoming cancer. Some cells that have
the capacity to switch from oxfos to
substrate level phosphorilation become
cancerous. So, we can link all of the
major chronic diseases, including
cancer, uh, back to mitochondrial
dysfunction, which then begs the
question, well, how do you prevent
cancer? And and and and you keep your
mitochondria healthy. It's extremely
difficult to get cancer if your
mitochondria healthy. Uh, well, how do I
keep my mitochondria healthy? Uh, do a
lot of exercise, stress management,
avoid uh highly processed carbohydrate
foods.
uh try to get good sleep, uh do all the
things that keep mitochondria healthy
and you don't get dementia, you don't
get cardiovascular disease, you don't
become obese, uh you don't get cancer,
you you you you significantly reduce the
risk for cancer and all these chronic
diseases by keeping your mitochondria
healthy. You know, is is very
interesting. um in the United States uh
uh we the the NCI National Cancer
Institute says we owe we reduced cancer
by 33%
um uh o over the last several decades
mainly because we had the antismoking
campaign of the 1990s and if we if we
all continued to smoke like crazy like
we were in the 1990s we would have 33%
more dead cancer patients today than we
actually have. So clearly the major drop
in cancer deaths came from the
elimination of a provocative behavioral
situation which was smoking. So why?
Because our mitochondria are healthier
when you don't smoke and and everything
comes back to the health and vitality of
the mitochondria. Do we want to go back
and become again living in a cave like
paleolithic man? No.
>> No. But finding that happy middle
ground.
>> Yes. But now we have an awareness and
and not only that we developed the
glucose ketone index calculator.
>> My next question was going to be exactly
that
>> which is now going to be the tool to
allow every person that has uh uh me can
measure their blood glucose and ketones
with a meter either by pricking their
finger to get a drop of blood or using a
continuous glucose ketone uh monitor on
your cell phone. You will be able to
know when you apply the GKI index, you
will know exactly what zone of health
you are in or not in. So you can know
that you will be in a high-risisk red
zone if you have uh a GKI that's over uh
50 up to 100. Uh you are going to be in
a very
a very a zone of mitochondrial ill
health.
>> Yeah. C can we backtrack quickly, do uh
Dr. to see free. Sorry about that. And
just uh briefly discuss what the glucose
ketone index is just for those in the
audience who maybe aren't familiar with
it. Uh that it's just what the relation
obviously it's a biomarker that I know
you have been intimately involved in
developing. Um
but yeah, what what exactly um is this
index and then how does it work?
Obviously you we are monitoring two
different biomarkers here, ketones,
things like but hydroxybutyrate acetate
etc. and then obviously glucose. But but
how uh does looking at those two markets
from a metabolic health standpoint help
us to well a determine metabolic health
and and maybe just a bit more nuance
there? I I know there's generally a
range there as well. You I think you
want to aim for for about a three when
looking to try and deal things
therapeutically. I may be wrong there.
Um but yeah, if you could just fill us
in sort of very on what that um that
index is all about. So again, go back to
evolutionary biology. Uh Paleolithic man
was always in a state of nutritional
ketosis. Uh mainly because they did not
have uh access to highly processed
carbohydrates in in in their diet. So
they had a lot of exercise and they had
a diet that was largely carniv
carnivorous uh with some vegetables, you
know, some tubers and this kind of
thing, but they were complex carbs. they
weren't these highly processed like you
mentioned already highly high glycemic
index kinds of things. So, so and food
was limited. I mean uh so when you put
that body and you and you look at the if
if they could look at their glucose and
ketones at that stage they would they
would find themselves in a in a state of
nutritional ketosis which is an
elevation of ketone bodies and a very
low
glucose level or I should say very
normal like 65 to 85 milligram per
decaler maybe 3 to four three.2 two to
four millolar glucose. These are normal
uh body levels of glucose produced by
the combination of gluconneogenesis as
as as well as uh carbohydrates that we
would get from the diet. So we would
always be in this beautiful insulin in
super insulin sensitive zone. Uh no
insulin resistance at all because
diabetes would be unheard of. Uh type
two of course not type one. type one
would have been afflicting us from the
beginning of time in one way or another.
But our our bodies would have been in
metabolic homeostasis
uh in in in as long as we weren't
starving, of course. But we could go
long periods of time without eating and
still maintain metabolic homeostasis
because we would be burning ketone
bodies uh that would be mobilized from
stored fat. So we developed the glucose
ketone index as a marker uh biioarker to
allow us to know what level of metabolic
homeostasis we would be in. So um you
know if you have a glucose ketone index
of of 20 or 10 I mean you're in some
level of metabolic homeostasis.
If you want to go into a deeper level of
what we call therapeutic ketosis, then
you'd go down to two uh uh a level of
two uh which is the ratio of blood sugar
divided by the ratio of beta
hydroxybutyrate which is the main ketone
body. And then you would say, oh, you
know, uh how do we know this? Because I
have friends Dom D. Augustino, Anthony
Chaffy, and these guys, they're always
in these states of nutritional ketosis.
What do they do? They do a lot of
exercise and they eat a lot of meat. A
and they stay in these in these
paleolithic kinds of zones. And these
are the zones that keep your
mitochondria super healthy. So what we
do is we take people from the population
and look at guys that have type 2
diabetes, obesity, and all these things.
And you find these GKI values over 50,
100, sometimes above 100. Are you
kidding me? I mean, it should be down in
the in the in the 5 to 10 zone or or 20
zone and you got 200. Oh, I'm obese. I
got uh systemic inflammation. I got of
course you're not in made you're not in
metabolic homeostasis. So, the glucose
ketone index tells us I built it for the
cancer patients because we knew that if
we lowered blood sugar down far enough,
the tumor cells need the sugar to grow
and they can't switch to ketones. So you
you put them in a very compromised
condition. Now what we do we see cancer
shrinking down tremendously when you get
the GKI 2.0 or below. Uh but you still
have the glutamine issue. So then we
develop the press pulse therapy to come
in and target with low dose of glutamine
inhibitors while the person is in a
state of nutritional ketosis. And
glutamine being the fermentable amino
acid that is then utilized as an
alternative fuel source by various
cancers in the absence of glucose. Is
that correct?
>> Yeah. And people always ask me what can
you do to lower what diet can I use to
lower glutamine? And if I eat meat,
won't that raise glutamine? The
glutamine in our body is already super
saturated uh because we use it for so
many things. The gut and our immune
system. they we already have more than
enough glutamine circulating in the body
to provide a tumor cell with more than
enough fuel in that regard. So it's
there's no diet that will lower glucose
a correction glutamine um uh and and and
uh uh um the glutamine will always
always be there. So e
you can't even if you do exercise yes
you can lower glutamine uh but it's not
to the level where you're going to to to
kill the tumor cell. So that's why we
need drugs. Um but the drugs have to be
strategic while you're in nutritional
ketosis. Blood sugar is down. Ketones
are elevated. So you got you got a choke
hold on the glucose pathway. Uh but you
got the glutamine pathway still opened.
and uh and then we come in with specific
drugs uh that will block glutamine's
availability. But we have to do this
very strategically because the same fuel
is needed by our immune cells. Our
immune cells and our gut use the same
fuel the tumor cells are using. So
that's why we developed the press pulse.
So we pulse glutamine. you do pulsing of
glutamine targeting, killing tumor cells
over a short period of time, removing
the pulse uh and allowing the immune
system to come in and kill uh uh to pick
up the dead corpses. Um so you have to
have the undertakers coming in, get rid
of the dead bodies in the micro
environment and that's your immune
system and that they need glutamine as
well. So this is why you need to
understand evolutionary biology and
biochemistry to be to effectively manage
cancer. If you don't understand biology
and biochemistry and evolutionary
biology, you are still in the stone age
when it comes to this kind of stuff.
>> You're just peddling drugs and hoping
for the best case scenario.
>> Yes. You don't know. You don't know why
things are working or how they work. We
know exactly how things are working and
why they work. And we we man we try to
perfect the system uh to keep these
tumor cells under restricted uh fuel
conditions and the body itself when when
increased in its health uh will turn on
the tumor cell on the tumor cells and
use them for fuel. It's called
autoolytic cannibalism. So the body
itself when put under can energy
restriction. Every cell in the body must
earn its existence in that body. There
can be no weak, lame, inefficient cells
because the body will turn on them and
use them for fuel. The tumor cell the
tumor tumor itself becomes a fuel source
for the rest of the body when you're put
into these states of nutritional
ketosis. So part of the solution to the
problem is when the normal cells
recognize a population of cells that are
inefficient in utilization of energy uh
and they turn on them and dissolve them
and use them for fuel. And that's people
say I don't know what happened to my
tumor. it just kind of disappeared when
I was in nutritional ketosis. Well, your
damn body ate it. So, uh um because it
was inefficient. They were using energy
inefficiently and and the body
recognizes that and they it's the term
autoytic cannibalism. I published that.
Um but we also can uh strategically
target glutamine to work together. It's
a whole systems approach to eliminating
a a bunch of cells that are growing out
of control using energy very
inefficiently being being dependent
predominantly on glucose and glutamine
and not being able to burn fatty acids
or ketones. It's an elegant system. It's
so beautiful. It works for the majority
of people and and and nobody's doing
this. There's no clinical trial anywhere
on the planet.
>> Make much money out of it.
Well, the money issue now becomes
another issue.
>> Yeah.
>> Um it's revenue first, uh patient
outcome second. Uh and I think people
need to know that they should know that
their disease is supporting and a gi a
giant industry. people. Many people are
grateful for those who have cancer
because the cancer patient supports a
very lucrative process. Um that would be
u potentially disturbed if we were to
find a method or a way to prevent or
manage cancer effectively. But you know,
man has made uh adjustments and
adaptations to uh disruptive
technologies uh and they will do the
same uh with this cancer and chronic
disease situation. It's just a matter of
time uh because we cannot continue uh h
on this path of of this abysmal path
that we've been on uh for the last uh 75
100 years. So, so we will we will begin
to change, but there will be new
industries and new strategies for
exploring and keeping people healthy and
others. So, we're trying to get a
revenue transition of revenue generation
from one failed system to a system that
really works but has not yet been uh
mature uh to replace the revenue lost
from one system. But, but I think that's
all part of the future as well. And uh
but right now my job is just to keep
people alive uh with a higher quality of
life using the knowledge of the biology
and biochemistry of the disease uh that
we understand.
>> Yeah, that's fascinating and uh I I
definitely would love to come back to
that in a minute. Um I'd just like to
quickly um uh chat about the ketogenic
diet a bit more. And I'm going to ask my
question first then ramble on for a bit.
if you don't mind. Uh I have a few
concerns about sort of long-term
utilization of the ketogenic diet. Not
for everybody, but just um I have found
that there are various people who who do
follow a ketogenic diet obviously are
going to to run into certain problems.
Some of them endocrine in nature um etc.
Now I I think of course most people who
are going to um explore this this meta
who are going to explore uh cancer
treatment from a metabolic standpoint
are going to utilize a ketogenic diet um
as their as their first step and and why
should they not now as I mentioned I've
got a few sort of concerns there um for
example I think there's I believe
there's rodent data out there to show
that uh a ketogenic diet long term may
uh impair I think it's hpatic FGF-21
signaling due to receptor down
regulation and that there are there are
other drivers uh issues there as well um
for example peripheral insulin
resistance which I'm sure you you're
familiar with uh for the audience
listening that being the idea that in
some people long-term ketogenic diet
adher adherence can essentially uh cause
a an insulin resistant-like state at the
level of the muscle because the body is
sort of not able or not readily
utilizing the glucose at his disposal
effectively. Now, uh I'm just
thumbsucking here, but uh I would be at
least mechanistically concerned that
those that those high levels of glucose
might then also be a contributing factor
um if you're sort of becoming more and
more insulin resistant. So, um, the the
way I see it, uh, just from the GKI
score side of things, and again, uh,
this is just me piecing a few things
together, uh, so tell me where where I'm
wrong, but, uh, are there other ways
that you can sort of look at increasing
your GKI score maybe without necessarily
um, utilizing long-term ketosis? And I
suppose that's a question in itself.
Should we always be in a state of
ketosis or should we sort of uh keep it
for a a period of time such as when
hopefully not uh you you have a disease
like this where it's needed. But beyond
that, what about uh strategies where you
are either intermittently fasting um and
and obviously including a certain amount
of carbohydrates in in that eating
window. Uh would that prov with that
fasting period? Uh obviously again the
the lower glycemic things. I'm not
talking about swallowing large
quantities of honey and processed sugar.
Um and then yeah other fuel sources
maybe that can sort of increase uh
ketone production your ketone esters
your NCT oils. Um yeah again I hope that
makes sense. I am rambling a bit and as
you no doubt already figured out I'm
definitely outside my wheelhouse here
but are there so do you have any
concerns again for the average person
following a ketogenic for a longer
period of time uh perhaps in light of
those uh mechanisms that I uh mentioned
and then beyond that um are those other
strategies aimed at sort of imp uh
improving a GKI index maybe without
being in constant in a constant state of
ketosis, are they worth exploring or is
it just not enough to actually deal with
the matter at hand?
>> Yeah. Well, you got you got a lot of
stuff that you uh just threw at me right
there.
>> Um, sorry about that. Um, but we can
break it down. The but you're 100%
correct. There's a lot of people who use
ketogenic diets uh inappropriately
uh that are not balanced with micro and
macronutrients which then can lead to
some of the conditions that you uh
mentioned u in in in your
>> yeah in your ramblings. But I I have
seen the same thing. I mean when we fed
ketogenic diets to the mice uh or humans
uh in an unrestricted way diets that
were not completely uh balanced in micro
and macronutrients
uh we got um all of many of the dis the
the
health issues that you mentioned uh were
seen tumors actually the tumors actually
grew grew faster. uh there was a
complete um um um
metabolic inh homeostasis.
You you found conditions that would be
reflective of of some of what you have
mentioned. Um, that's why we we we try
to get away from the term diet and we
talk about nutritional ketosis a as a a
as a um a state of of um metabolic
homeostasis where uh your levels of
ketones are not exorbitantly high and
your levels of glucose are not
exorbitantly low. Uh but you are
balanced in micro and macronutrients.
uh with a GKI of of um you know five or
10 uh and and as you exactly as you said
in our new uh paper that we're working
on right now which will revolutionize
the treatment of cancer and all these
chronic diseases. Uh we have built a
colorcoded chart to allow people to know
what zones they're in at any given time
and whether or not they can move uh
effectively from one zone to the next
like uh yes intermittent fasting or uh
the enjoyment. If you have been in a nut
state of nutritional ketosis and you go
out and party and your body then uh
shows a a a much uh higher GKI which
would be unhealthy. Uh you would then
know what you would need to do to bring
it back into a normal a normal range uh
with with the types of foods and
exercise. Exercise is extremely
important. You can move these these
zones up and down. So you don't have to
feel compelled to be locked into a
particular state, but but having the
knowledge of what are the healthy states
and what aren't the healthy states.
Knowing like for example the Greek
patients that did really well on the
keto diet, it was a met a
calorierestricted Mediterranean diet um
sardines, salmon, avocados, olive oil,
and this kind of thing uh that most
people can do uh without too much
difficulty. They had they had good GKI.
They were very balanced in micro and
macronutrients. But you could switch
from that to a carnivore. You there's a
lot of flexibility
in in in what a person can do to move in
and out of these health zones uh without
causing metabolic inh homeostasis. Um so
we're working on that. We've published a
big paper for the brain cancer patients
to tell them exactly and address the
questions that you that you raised. uh
what what are what are the choices uh
what are the variations that you can use
to maintain constant pressure on tumor
cells while constantly keeping the the
the the homeostasis of your normal cells
at the highest level and metabolic
homeostasis. Um, so we're working on
that and the to address your questions
is most of the health problems
associated with long-term ketogenic
diets uh result from um micro and
macronutrient imbalances
um that lead to pathologies some of
which you which you have already
elucidated. So uh once the knowledgeable
once the base of knowledge becomes uh
available for people uh they they can
they can then uh build diets and and we
call it nutritional ketosis uh because
you can achieve that with a carnivore
diet, a Mediterranean diet, a
pescatarian diet. Uh vegan diets are a
little harder. um a a vegan veganism
lot you're you're you have to supplement
with micronutrients
uh and some macronutrients in order to
maintain metabolic. It's not a natural
situation. Humans did not evolve as
vegans. If we if we were vegans, we
would have been extinct a long time ago.
So um but we are omnivores. We we're
we're our bodies were were evolved to be
to eat anything walks, crawls, flies, or
swims on this planet. And you can you
can build nutritional ketosis from
combinations of the natural foods that
we evolved to eat. You just have to
adjust the amounts that you're eating
and the types that you're eating. So in
our new new study that will come out for
managing cancer and chronic diseases
deals exactly uh with what you what we
what you have mentioned to allow people
to always remain in a state of maximal
metabolic homeostasis but allowing
allowing the individual to know what
zone of health they're in to allow
mitochondria to be as healthy as
possible and not too restrictive in in
in in
rigidity
in in in what you're doing. Uh because
part of enjoyment of life is is the
enjoyment of what we like to eat and
drink and and we don't like to be a
pigeon holed into a particular way of
doing something that eventually turns
someone from being happy into miserable.
Um but we but we can we can but now with
our new system uh that will come out uh
on the apps you will know at any given
time uh what you can uh can eat uh for
how long uh and how healthy it can be.
So everybody will and everybody's unique
individual. Uh we also have to recognize
that we have sex differences uh we have
age differences, we have cultural
differences and we have religious
differences. So people are in these
cultural religion different ages and
things. They have to build their diet
and lifestyle around a GKI that meets
that meets their needs and keeps them in
a comfortable zone. So, so uh and
they'll know the quant quantification of
that by looking at their glucose ketone
index and matching it to a particular
zone of health. So, so we will eliminate
um uh adverse effects uh uh allowing
people to be flexible so they can
prevent uh these kinds of of situations.
And I think what we're running into now
is people say, "I'm doing a keto. I'm
eating lard every day and I'm I'm
getting unhealthy." Yeah, who wouldn't
get unhealthy? Uh the the the question
is we want to eliminate those kinds of
uh ambiguities
in what people can and cannot eat and
give them give them the level of
flexibility that will make it
comfortable for their for their
existence while at the same time
maintaining mitochondrial health. And I
think knowledge is power. And every
individual will adjust their own GKI and
build their own diets and know how much
exercise they need to do and to keep
them to keep their uh um their their
body in a state of nutritional and
physical health. So this is the future.
Um and and but we're aware of everything
you said. And when you start something
off in the beginning, people sometimes
overdo it. They do it the wrong way and
then they end up with these pathologies
that become uh apparent uh for like you
mentioned with you know all these sex
hormone issues. Yeah.
>> Yeah. I mean that should not have to
happen. Paleolithic man never had to
deal with these things. His his main
problem was starvation. You know when
you don't have any food you starve to
death.
>> Ketones are high.
>> Yeah. and and well, you can only get
ketones if you have normal normal
hormonal insulin levels. Your ketones
can never get ketoacidotic. That's type
1 diabetes predominantly. Um where you
have very high glucose and very high
ketones together in your body. Uh that's
pathological. Uh
natural therapeutic ketosis is is low
glucose elevated ketones but not
elevated to the level of keto acid
because you piss out excess ketones. But
when you don't have insulin, you keep
all that in your body. Your body seems
like it's starving. You can't get rid of
the you're making ketones in too high of
a level, keeping too much in your body.
So again, and we also know that there
are some people that have carnitine
deficiencies that can't metabolize
ketones. There are people that get
severe rashes from trying to get into
these uh conditions. Um and there are
certain people take medications that
interfere with the ability to metabolize
ketone bodies. So, so we we have to be
aware of the interference of nutritional
ketosis. But at least when you're aware,
you can alert people uh to these uh to
these um hazards, metabolic hazards, and
they can make adjustments themselves.
So, so all of this, we have thought
about all of this. Why? Because we don't
do anything else in our life except
think about these kinds of things. We're
we're laser laser focused. We don't
think about anything else except what
you just talked about all the time. Not
just occasionally, 24/7.
That's what we do.
>> Dr. Seaffrey, thank you so much for
that. That That was incredible. Um to be
honest, I think I've got through what
20% of the questions that I' I'd hope to
be able to talk to you about today. So,
I'm going to have to twist your arm
somehow, God willing, into getting you
back for round two at some point in the
future. Uh
>> what was the main what was their main
question that I did not answer?
>> Oh, no. I I wanted to go down the rabbit
hole regarding uh various fatty acids um
and uh uh specifically talk about uh
saturated fats versus unsaturated fats
and the the issues regarding um some
people running into insulin resistance
having sort of high amounts of saturated
fats and the ceramides there. Um I don't
know if you've seen that to be an issue
clinically. We we we published a big
paper looking at all that stuff uh in
mice on restricted and unrestricted. You
it's hard to get into ketosis on
polyunsaturated fatty acids. Uh but
there and the omega-3 fatty acids are
very healthy for people. Uh some of the
omega sixs are not. So so you you you we
published a big paper on all this. So
almost everything I have looked at in
one way or the other. Uh I just don't
have time to talk about it all. But of
course our open access papers on
restricted and unrestricted diets, high
carb uh keto and fish oil diets and all
this kind of stuff. So we have looked at
that and the body is a machine that
metabolizes the fuels effectively.
Ketones will be produced from saturated
fat. MCT oil, little MCT oil uh is
really great in producing ketone bodies
endogenously uh um db beta
hydroxybutyrate rather than L's. There's
a way to there's a way to do all that.
We we've looked at almost every every
damn thing we can look at. Um so uh I
have papers on that but yes we have
looked at that. Um we try to do
everything always again mention remember
everything is metabolized majority in
the mitochondria and the cytoplasm. So
once you once you understand uh these
metabolic pathways you you know how to
keep your mitochondria as healthy as
possible which will make you because
ultimately you're interested in avoiding
chronic disease. That's it. You don't
want chronic disease. You don't want
cancer and you don't want chronic
disease. How do you prevent that? Keep
your mitochondria healthy. How do you
keep your mitochondria healthy? Keep
glucose down and and elevate ketones.
The mitochondria. And I I don't have
time to talk but in our new paper we uh
we talk about the the bioenergetics
of burning fatty acids ketone bodies and
pyuvate the bioenergetic
related to the delta G- prime ATP
hydrarolysis and how and how we can get
more bang for your buck every breath of
air can give you more ATP when you're
burning ketone body than when you're
burning pyuvate or fatty acids. So, so
we know the bioenergetics. We published
that and our big paper is going to be
coming out on that and we got all that
from the the late Richard Vech, one of
the great and he was he was Hans Krebs's
last graduate student. So, I he and I
would talk for hours and hours and hours
about all the bioenergetics of
mitochondria and what you need to keep
it healthy and functional. So, there's a
strong bioenergetic e explanation for a
lot of what I'm saying and that's in our
papers. Yeah, we we'll definitely be
sure to link them in all the show notes
then.
>> Yeah, make sure Yeah. Uh uh tell folks
that uh all of our papers are open
access. Uh so anybody with a computer
can get the information. Now people are
going to be overwhelmed and say, "Oh my
god, Caffrey published so many papers."
Um yeah, a lot of it's on what I'm
talking about. A lot of it's on other
things. But but uh you can go through
and fer it out uh what we're what we're
doing. And people need to know that all
of our research is is supported by
philanthropy and private foundations. So
we we get uh when we keep people alive
who are stage four cancer, uh they
so-called terminal and all of a sudden
you're living a lot longer with a higher
quality of life. uh some people feel
very compelled to donate to our to our
research because they they they want to
they and and one thing I want to make
sure never say we we have a cure for
cancer. Uh because I have no clue
whether what we do will cure cancer or
not. The only thing that we have seen
over and over again is we we have a
longer progressionfree survival without
symptoms and and a a very increased
overall survival uh uh of cancer
patients. Whether they're cured or not,
we don't know. But I consider success in
keeping terminally people given terminal
diagnosis alive far far longer than what
the establishment predicted their
lifespan to be. So I never like to use
the term terminal because I have there's
I have a lot of people that I know who
are still alive. I I don't know sometime
in the future they may be terminal but
they're not dead yet and they're pretty
healthy. So, what the hell does that
mean? And they were told they only had
nine months to live and they're out six
years. Uh, who made the mistake there?
Uh, why was someone told they have six
months or a year to live and they're
living five and six years or even
longer?
How did anybody make that level of
mistake? Uh, they made the mistake
because they don't understand metabolic
therapy and how long you can possibly
live with a higher quality of life. But
whether you get a cure or not, I have no
clue. All we know is we have a new
strategy for managing cancer and chronic
disease that is far more powerful and
successful than anything out there right
now. The problem is people just don't
know about it and don't know how to
implement it yet. And that's going to
take that will be the future.
>> That will be uh down to people like us
aiming to educate the greater public.
Dr. Seaffrey, thank you so much for your
time. Um for people who are interested
in your work and to learn more about uh
your various metabolic therapies, where
can we point them to?
>> Well, again, I have my metabolic uh
papers already published, open access,
and donations go to Travis
Kristofferson's Foundation for Cancer
Metabolic Therapy. It's a it's a a legit
a legitimate foundation and the
university, Boston College itself, the
biology department for sure. So, so, uh,
that keeps us going and we and we've got
a couple of blockbuster things coming
out, uh, that are really going to
transform, uh, the healthc care
industry, uh, dramatically. Um, uh, and
and they'll be out within within the
year. Uh, and then you're going to see
organizations set up around these
approaches for metabolic health. And
we're going to bring a lot of people
back uh uh into what we call normaly
metabolic homeostasis if they want to.
>> Yes,
>> I'm not twisting anybody's arm here.
It's only if people who want to if they
don't if they want to live in a in a
toxic state that's their choice. uh but
we have a tool now uh to allow them to
come out of those toxic states and live
a healthy productive life uh with a
clear quantitative assessment to do that
and that and that is coming down and
you'll see that within the next year or
two for sure.
>> So uh so we're very hopeful uh for
managing chronic diseases and I think
most people are going to be very
appreciative uh as they begin to benefit
uh from what we're doing. No, I'm sure
they will. And it's just about I mean
ultimately I think most disease uh the
way I'm starting to view it is it
ultimately comes down to um sort of uh
removing the removing the the
environmental burden or whatever
environmental trigger there is that's
driving the disease, improving the
metabolic health and subsequently
mitochondrial health and then dealing
with the the stress component which is
also obviously overlooked. And I think
when you get those three sort of
components sort of dialed in, you've
sort of solved 90% of the equation at
least when it comes to chronic disease.
Um
>> which which is mostly crippling western
societies.
>> Yes.
>> So it's it's the single most biggest
problem. Cancer and chronic diseases are
dementia, type 2 diabetes, obesity,
cardiovascular disease, cancer. You go
right down the list. It's just like
everything. So, um, what do we do with
all these healthy people if they Well,
we're keeping a lot of people alive,
working for a longer period of time with
a higher quality of life. I mean, you're
going to have to have a readjustment of
society, you know. So,
>> yeah. Well, let's aim to get there and
then we can deal with that problem when
it arises.
>> Yes, absolutely. All right. Well,
listen, thank you very much.
>> Thank you, Dr. Seaff Freed. It's been an
absolute honor and I appreciate your
time.
>> Yeah. Well, thank you.